---
layout: post
title: "Group Theory, Part I: Definitions and Basics"
author: "Jay Havaldar"
date:   2017-09-19
mathjax: true
category: [math]
download: true
category: notes
---

A **group** is a set together with a binary operation (multiplication) so that:

- Multiplication is associative.
- There is an identity $e$ so that $eg = ge = g$.
- For each $g$ there is an inverse $g^{-1}$ so that $gg^{-1} = g^{-1}g = e$.
- The group is closed under multiplication.

The **order** of an element $a$ is the minimum integer $n$ so that $a^n = e$. The subgroup consisting of all elements of the group of finite order is called the **torsion subgroup**.

##### Example

An important example of a group is the dihedral group $D_n$. It is generated by two kinds of elements: rotations, and reflections. It describes the symmetries of an $n$-gon with composition. The two kinds of elements are respectively described as:
<p>$$
r^n = e \\
s^2 = e \\
srs = r^{-1}
$$</p>

$D_1$ is for example defined as $\\{1,r\\}$ so it is simply $\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$. On the other hand, $D_2 = \\{1,r,s,rs\\}$ is not cyclic; it is called the **Klein** group or the 4-group, which is distinct from $\mathbb{Z}/4\mathbb{Z}$.

## The General Linear Group

An important group is the general group $GL(V)$. For an $n$-dimensional vector space $V$ over a field, we can think of $GL(V)$ as the set of $n\times n$ matrices over a field with nonzero determinant -- with multiplication defined in the usual way (once we fix a basis).

A **bilinear form** $\phi: V\times V \rightarrow F$ that is linear in each variable. An **automorphism** of $\phi$ is is an isomorphism $\alpha: V \rightarrow V$ so that:
<p>$$
\phi(\alpha v, \alpha w) = \phi(v,w)
$$</p>

With a choice of a basis, we can restate this condition in terms of the matrix for $\alpha$ and the matrix $P$ for $\phi$:
<p>$$\begin{aligned}
(Av)^T\cdot P Aw &= v^T P w \\
v^TA^TPAw &= v^T P w 
\end{aligned}$$</p>
So:
<p>$$
A^TPA = P
$$</p>

In particular, if $\phi$ is **symmetric**, i.e.:
<p>$$
\phi(v,w) = \phi(w,v)
$$</p>

Then we have the following definition.

**Definition:** For a symmetric non-degenerate bilinear form $\phi$, define its automorphism group $Aut(\phi)$ to be the isomorphisms $\alpha$ so that $\phi(\alpha v, \alpha w) = \phi(v,w)$. This is called the **orthogonal group** of $\phi$. 

**Definition:** For a skew-symmetric non-degenerate bilinear form $\phi$, define its automorphism group $Aut(\phi)$ to be the isomorphisms $\alpha$ so that $\phi(\alpha v, \alpha w) = \phi(v,w)$. This is called the **symplectic group** of $\phi$. 

In this case, we can write $\phi$ in some basis as the matrix:
<p>$$J_{2m}=
\begin{bmatrix}
0 & I_m \\ -I_m & 0
\end{bmatrix}
$$</p>

Where $2m=n$. Therefore, the symplectic group condition simply means a matrix has the property:
<p>$$
A^TJ_{2m}A = J_{2m}
$$</p>

## Subgroups

A subgroup is a subset of a group which is closed under multiplication and inverses, and which contains the identity. A particularly important is called the center of a group.

**Definition:** The **center** of a group $G$, denoted $Z(G)$ consists of all the elements which commute with all of $G$, i.e.:
<p>$$
Z(G) = \{z \in G\ :\ zx=xz\ \forall x\in G\}
$$</p>

##### Proposition

> An intersection of subgroups is a subgroup.

The proof here is fairly straightforward.

We can talk about the **cosets** of a subgroup $H$ as elements of the form $aH$ for some $a\in G$, where:
<p>$$
aH = \{ah\ :\ h \in H\}
$$</p>

Cosets are well-defined, and are either disjoint or equal. Suppose that $a\ in bH$, then we can say for some $h\in H$:
<p>$$
a = bh \\
aH = bhH = bH
$$</p>
So that means we can write a coset as $aH$ for any choice of representative $a$. By the above argument, if two cosets share a single element, they are the same set. Finally, we can map $aH$ to $bH$ via multiplication by $ba^{-1}$ (and conversely, map from $bH$ to $aH$ via multiplication by $ab^{-1}$). Thus, all the cosets are the same size.

**Definition:** The **index** of a subgroup $H$ of $G$ is the number of left cosets of $H$ in $G$, and is denoted $(G:H)$.

##### Proposition (Lagrange's Theorem)

> The order of a subgroup divides the order of the group.

We have:
<p>$$
|G| = (G:H)|H|
$$</p>
Therefore, $|H|$ divides $|G|$.

As a corollary, we consider the group generated by a certain element $a$. It has size $n$, where $n$ is the order of $a$, and forms a subgroup. Thus, the order of any element in a group divides the order of the group.

We also have the following "cancellation" theorem. If $H$ is a subgroup of $G$ and $K$ is a subgroup of $H$, we have:
<p>$$
(G:K) = (G:H)(H:K)
$$</p>

## Homomorphisms

**Definition:** A **homomorphism** between groups $G, G'$ is a map $\varphi: G\rightarrow G'$ so that $\varphi(ab) = \varphi(a)\varphi(b)$. In a sense, a homomorphism preserves the structure of the group. If a homomorphism is bijective, we say that it is an **isomorphism**.

### Cayley's Theorem

An important theorem is Cayley's Theorem, which says we can think of each group as a subgroup of a permutation group. For $a \in G$, define the map:
<p>$$
\phi_a: G \rightarrow G \\
\phi_a(b) = ab
$$</p>
Thus, the map $\phi_a$ is just multiplication by $A$. We can also show that it is a bijection, since we have:
<p>$$
\phi_a\circ\phi_{a^{-1}}(b) = \phi_a(a^{-1}b) = aa^{-1}b = b
$$</p>

And in fact we can say that:
- Each $\phi_a$ is a bijection from $G$ to $G$, hence $\phi_a \in S_{\|G\|}$, the symmetric group or group of permutations of $G$.
- The map $\Phi: a\mapsto \phi_a$ is an injective map from $G$ to $S_{\|G\|}$.

So this brings us to Cayley's Theorem:

<center> Any finite group is a subgroup of a symmetric group.</center>

## Normal Subgroups

**Definition:** A subgroup $N$ of a group $G$ is normal if $gNg^{-1} = N$ for all $g\in G$. A normal subgroup is denoted $N \trianglelefteq G$.

It is sufficient to check that $gNg^{-1} \subset N$ for each $g$, since multiplying gives us $Ng^{-1} = g^{-1}N \implies N \subseteq g^{-1}Ng$, and substituting $g=g^{-1}$ we get the reverse inclusion.

Note however, that we can find a subgroup $N$ and an element $g$ so that $gNg^{-1} \subset N$ with strict inequality; however, if this holds for all $g$, then we indeed have a normal subgroup.

##### Proposition
> Every subgroup of index two is normal.

Suppose $H$ is a subgroup of index two. 
Pick $g\in G$ which is not in $H$. then $gH$ is the complement of $H$. Similarly, $Hg$ is the complement of $H$. So we have $gH = Hg$. Then $gHg^{-1} = H$.

**Definition:** A group is **simple** if it has no normal subgroups other than itself and the trivial subgroup.

##### Proposition

> Suppose $H$, $N$ are subgroups of $G$ and $N$ is a normal subgroup. Then $HN = \{hn\ :\ h\in H, n \in N\}$ is a subgroup of $G$. If $H$ is also a normal subgroup, then $HN$ is a normal subgroup of $G$.

Note that $gNg^{-1} = N$, so that we can write $gN = Ng$. For any $n\in N$, we can write $gn = n'g$ where $n' \in N$.

Taking $h_1n_1, h_2n_2 \in HN$, we have:
<p>$$
(h_1n_1)(h_2n_2) = h_1h_2n_1'n_2 \in HN
$$</p>

So indeed $HN$ is closed under multiplication. It contains the identity automatically, and we can check inverses:
<p>$$
(hn)^{-1} = n^{-1}h^{-1} = h^{-1}n'^{-1} \in HN
$$</p>

So indeed $HN$ is a subgroup.

If $H,N$ are both normal, we can write:
<p>$$
gHNg^{-1} = gHg^{-1}gNg^{-1} = HN
$$</p>

And we are done. We can also define the normal subgroup generated by any set in $G$.

**Definition:** For any set $X \subset G$, the smallest normal subgroup generated by $X$ is exactly:
<p>$$
\bigcup\limits_{g\in G} gXg^{-1}
$$</p>

##### Theorem

> A subgroup $N$ of $G$ is normal iff it is the kernel of some homomorphism.

Evidently, the kernel of a homomorphism is a normal subgroup since for any $x\in \ker \varphi$:
<p>$$
\varphi(gxg^{-1})=\varphi(g)e\varphi(g)^{-1} = e
$$</p>

Conversely, we map $g \mapsto gN$, i.e. map to cosets. We just need to show that $G/N$ has a group structure which is preserved by this map. Define $(aN)(bN) = (ab)N$. We need to show that this multiplication is well defined.

Suppose that $aN = a'N$ and $bN = b'N$. Then we can show:
<p>$$
abN = a(bN) = ab'N = aNb' = a'Nb' =a'b'N
$$</p>

Where we use freely here that $aN=Na$ by the fact that $N$ is a normal subgroup. So indeed this map is well defined, and preserves the group structure, and its kernel is evidently $N$. We call $G/N$ the **quotient** of $G$ by $N$.

## The Isomorphism Theorems

As per usual, we have the isomorphism theorems.

##### First Isomorphism Theorem
> Let $\varphi: G \rightarrow G'$ be a homomorphism of groups. Then:
><p>$$
\frac{G}{\ker \varphi} \cong \varphi(G)
>$$</p>

And since $\ker \varphi$ is a normal subgroup by the above discussion, we have that $\varphi(G)$ is a subgroup of $G'$.

##### Second Isomorphism Theorem
> Let $S$ be a subgroup of $G$, and $N$ a normal subgroup of $G$. Then:
> - $SN$ is a subgroup of $G$.
> - $S \cap N$ is a normal subgroup of $S$.
> - $\frac{SN}{N} \cong \frac{S}{S\cap N}$.

##### Third Isomorphism Theorem
> Suppose $K,N$ are normal subgroups of $G$ with $N\subseteq K \subseteq G$. Then:
> <p>$$\frac{G/N}{K/N} \cong \frac{G}{K}$$</p>

Furthermore, we have the following correspondences from the third isomorphism theorem:

##### "Fourth" Isomorphism Theorem
> Suppose $N$ is a normal subgroup of $G$. Then there is a correspondence between subgroups $K$ of $G$ which contain $N$ and subgroups of $G/N$, given by:
> <p>$$K \leftrightarrow kN$$</p>
> Where $k \in K$ is a representative. Similarly, the same bijection gives a correspondence between normal subgroups $K$ of $G$ which contain $N$ and normal subgroups of $G/N$.

