---
layout: post
title: "The Sylow Theorems"
author: "Jay Havaldar"
date:   2017-07-06
mathjax: true
tags: [math, group theory]
category: notes
download: true
---

# Sylow Theorems

The Sylow theorems tell us quite a lot of information in general about the subgroups of a group of finite order. In this post, I'll be covering the basic ideas behind and finally the proofs of the Sylow theorems.

## Group Actions

First, we describe group actions. For any group $G$ and a set $S$, we can define a group action $\rho:\ G \rightarrow Perm(S)$ which is a homomorphism from the group to the symmetric group to the set's permutations group. Alternatively, we could define the group action as operating on pairs in the product $G \times S$, i.e.:

<p>
$$
\rho:\ G \times S \rightarrow S
$$
</p>

With this definition, we also require associativity and also the action of the identity ($\rho(e,s) = s$).

###### Example

For example, we look at conjugation. Let $c(x):\ G \rightarrow G$ be the map so that $c(x)(y)=xyx^{-1}$. In other words, $c$ is a homomorphism from $G$ to $Aut(G)$. We denote the kernel of this homomorphism as the **center** of $G$, denoted $Z(G)$.

---

**Definition:** For a defined group action $\rho:\ G\rightarrow S$, the **stabilizer** of $s\in S$ consists of all the elements $x\in G$ so that $\rho(x,s) = s$. In other words, the stabilizer of $s$ is all the group elements which send $s$ to itself. Often it is denoted $G_s$

**Definition:** In the case where $\rho$ is the conjugation group action, the isotropy group of $a$ is called the **centralizer** of $a$. These are also all the elements $x$ which commute with $a$. The isotropy group of a subgroup $H \subseteq G$ is called the **normalizer** of $H$.

**Definition:** We define the **orbit** of $s \in S$ under $G$ to be the set $\{xs \vert x \in G\}$. In the case of the conjugation action, we refer to the orbits as **conjugacy classes** and it is clear that they form an equivalence class for the set.

There is a natural bijection between $G/G_s$ and $Gs$, with the explicit bijection given by $hG_s \rightarrow hs$. Furthermore, the order of the orbit $Gs$ is equal to the index $(G:G_s)$.

In particular, the number of conjugate subgroups to $H$ is equal to the index of the normalizer of $H$. Also, the number of elements in the conjugacy class of $x$ is equal to the index of the centralizer, i.e. $G/G_s$.

##### Example

We will prove that every subgroup of index $2$ is normal. Let $S$ be the set of cosets of $H$ defined in the usual way (there should be two). Then, the group action is defined as a homomorphism from $G$ to $S_2 =Z_2$. Consider the kernel $K$ of this homomorphism; this is all group elements $g \in G$ so that $gH = H$. So, the kernel of this homomorphism is a subgroup of $H$. But then that means $G/K$ is a subgroup of $Z_2$. So $(G:K)$ is either $1$ or $2$. But we know that:

<p>
$$
(G:K) = (G:H)(H:K)
$$
</p>
And $(G:H)=2$, so we must have $(H:K)=1$ so this tells us that $(H:K)=1$ and indeed $H=K$. So that means $H$ is the kernel of the given homomorphism.

But for any homomorphism $\phi$, if we pick an arbitrary $g\in G$ and $k$ in the kernel, we have $\phi(gkg^{-1}) = \phi(g)\ \phi(k)\ \phi(g)^{-1} = e$. So indeed, the kernel is a normal subgroup. Therefore, $H$ from the previous example is a normal subgroup.

---

We also can write the obvious fact that the order of a set $S$ is the sum of all the orbits in this new notation, in the **decomposition formula:**
<p>
$$
|S| = \sum\limits_{G_s} (G:G_s)
$$
</p>

We have a special case where the group action is conjugation. In this case, we take $Y$ to be a set of representatives from each conjugation class and write the **class formula**:
<p>
$$
|G| = |Z(G)| + \sum\limits_{y\in Y} (G:G_y)
$$
</p>

---

## Sylow Subgroups

**Definition** Let $p$ be a prime number. Then a Sylow $p$-group is a finite group of order $p^n$ for some $n$.

With this definition, we prove an intermediate theorem:

### Theorem

Let $G$ be a non-trivial $p$-group. Then $G$ has a non-trivial center. Furthermore, $G$ is solvable.

##### Proof

From the class formula, we have:

<p>
$$
|G| = |Z(G)| + \sum\limits_{y\in Y} (G:G_y)
$$
</p>

If the center is trivial, then the sum on the RHS of the equation adds up to $\|G\| - 1 $. Since $G$ is a $p$-group, the prime $p$ divides both sides of the equation. However, this is clearly impossible since $p$ does not divide $\|G\|-1$. So the center is non-trivial.

We also know that $G/Z(G)$ is a $p$-group as well, and it is strictly smaller than $G$. The rest of the proof proceeds by induction on $n$.

We know for a fact that cyclic groups are solvable (with the shortest normal series which is abelian). Suppose the theorem holds for all $p$-groups with $n \le k-1$. Then, we have that $Z(G)$ and $G/Z(G)$ are both solvable since they are $p$-groups as well. So, we have proved the $n=k$ case.

---

### Theorem: First Sylow Theorem

Suppose that we have $p^n \mid G$ and $p^{n-1} \nmid G$ for some prime $p$. Then, define a Sylow $p$-subgroup of $G$ to be a subgroup of order $p^n$. We will prove that for every $p \mid G$, there exists a $p$-Sylow subgroup.

##### Lemma: Cauchy's Theorem

We start with the brief lemma that for any finite abelian group $G$, for any prime $p \mid\ \vert G \vert$, there is a subgroup in $G$ of order $p$. This is known as Cauchy's lemma and is a special case of Sylow's First Theorem.

By the fundamental theorem of finite abelian groups, $G$ can be written as the direct product:
<p>
$$
G = G(p) \times G'
$$
</p>
Where $\vert G' \vert$ is prime to $p$. Take an element $a\in G(p)$ with order $p^k$. Then take:

<p>
$$
b = a^{p^{k-1}}
$$
</p>

We know that $b$ is not the identity. However, $b^p = a^{p}=e$. So, $b$ generates a cyclic group of order $p$, and we are done.

In fact, we can generalize Cauchy's theorem to arbitrary finite groups using the class equation:

<p>
$$
|G| = |Z(G)| + \sum\limits_{y\in Y} (G:G_y)
$$
</p>

Suppose that $p \mid \vert Z(G) \vert$. Then we can apply the earlier proof to $Z(G)$ to find an element of order $p$ in $Z(G) \subseteq G$; so we are done.

Suppose instead that $p \nmid \|Z(G)\|$. Then, the sum on the right hand side cannot divide $p$ either, and in particular there is at least one conjugacy class $G_y$ with order prime to $p$. Therefore, $p \nmid \vert \frac{G}{G_y} \vert$. But this means that $G_y$ divides $p$! Applying Cauchy's lemma to this group, we find an element of order $p$ in $G_y$ and therefore in $G$, and we are done.

---

##### Proof of Sylow's First Theorem

Cauchy's lemma proves that $G$ certainly has a subgroup of size $p$. With Sylow's first theorem, we prove that $G$ has a subgroup of size $p^n$, where $p^n$ is the largest power of $p$ dividing the order of $G$. We proceed by induction on the size of $G$.

Suppose that there is a proper subgroup $H \subset G$ so that $(G:H)$ does not divide $p$. Then $p^n \mid \|H\|$, and so by induction $H$ has a $p$-Sylow subgroup which is also a $p$-Sylow subgroup of $G$. We assume then that every proper subgroup $H \subset G$ has the property that $p \mid (G:H)$. Now, we let $G$ act on itself by conjugation and consider the class formula:

<p>
$$
|G| = |Z(G)| + \sum\limits_{y\in Y} (G:G_y)
$$
</p>

The order of each of the orbits divides the order of the group (since a stabilizer or in this case a conjugacy class, is a subgroup), so $p$ divides the order of $Z(G)$, and $G$ has a non-trivial center; furthermore, by a similar proof to Cauchy's lemma, we have that $G$ contains a subgroup $H$ of size $p$. Furthermore, since $H$ is a subgroup of the center in particular, it is a normal subgroup.

We consider the group $G/H$. By the inductive hypothesis, this group has a subgroup $K'$ of order $p^{n-1}$. By the third isomorphism theorem, $K'$ is really (isomorphic to) a subgroup of the form $K/H$, where $H \subset K \subset G$. Take this $K$; it has order $p^n$ as desired.

---

### Theorem: Second Sylow Theorem

The second Sylow Theorem states that all $p$-Sylow subgroups are conjugate to each other. Before we get to that, let's prove a related lemma:

##### Lemma: Every $p$-subgroup of $G$ is contained in some $p$-Sylow subgroup.

This isn't hard to prove using the class formula. Let $S$ be the set of $p$-Sylow subgroups of $G$, and $G$ operates on $S$ by conjugation. Let's take $P$ to be one of those Sylow subgroups. Then we have:

<p>
$$
|Orb(P)| = \frac{\vert G \vert}{\vert G_{P} \vert}
$$
</p>

Where $G_P$ is the normalizer of $P$ which sends $P$ to itself under conjugation. Evidently, $G_P$ contains $P$, so that means $\|Orb(P)\|$ is prime to $p$. Let's take a look at the action of a $p$-subgroup $H$ on $Orb(P)$ using the class formula:

<p>
$$
\vert Orb(P)\vert = |Z| + \frac{\vert Orb(P) \vert}{\vert H_{Orb(P)} \vert}
$$
</p>

By Lagrange, each term in the right hand sum divides $ \|H\| $ so that means there is a non-trivial center $P'$ within $\|Orb(P)\|$. This means that $H$ is contained within the normalizer of $P'$. Since $H$ is contained in the normalizer, by the second isomorphism theorem we know that $HP'$ is a subgroup with $P' \trianglelefteq HP'$. The order of the quotient group $HP'/P \cong H/(H \cap P')$ is a power of $p$, so the order of $HP'$ is also a power of $p$. But then $HP' = P'$ since $P'$ is a maximal $p$-subgroup of $G$; and therefore $H \subseteq P'$. We have now found a Sylow subgroup which contains $H$.

##### Proof of Sylow's Second Theorem

Let H be some $p$-Sylow subgroup of $G$. $H$ is contained in some conjugate $P'$ of $P$ by the above argument. And again by the above construction, because $H$ and $P'$ have equal orders, $H = P'$.

This second theorem implies as a direct corollary that if there is only one $p$-Sylow subgroup, it is normal.

---

### Sylow's Third Theorem

Sylow's Third Theorem is arguably the most useful. It says that the number of $p$-Sylow subgroups of $G$ is equal to $1\mod p$. That means by counting arguments, if $\|G\|/p^{n} < p$, then the Sylow subgroup is normal.

##### Proof of Sylow's Third Theorem

Take the action of $H = P$ on the set $S$ consisting of the Sylow $p$-subgroups. Any other orbit cannot have just one element $P'$, or else $H$ is contained in the normalizer of $P'$, and by earlier arguments $H=P=P'$. Take an element $s'$ of any other orbit. It has a stabilizer, which is a proper subgroup of $H$; the stabilizer is a subgroup, so it is divisible by $p$.

As a result, the number of elements in $S'$ is divisible by $p$. So the size of $S$ (the set of all $p$-Sylow subgroups) is equal to 1 (the size of the center of conjugation under $P$) plus the size of all the remaining orbits (all of which have orders which divide p). So we are done.


